.TH HOSTS3D 1 "13 Apr 26"
.SH NAME
hosts3d \- 3D real-time network monitor
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B hosts3d \fR[\fB\-f\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Hosts3D
is a 3D real-time network monitor that displays hosts and packet
traffic.  Features include support for multiple sensors, analysis of
packets to gather hostnames and services, configurable layout of
subnetworks, packet capture/replay, managed local \fBhsen\fR sensors,
and filtering by host, protocol tree, sensor, or port.
.TP
.B \-f
Display full screen.
.P
Press \fBH\fR in Hosts3D or open \fBHelp\fR from the right-click menu.
.SH "DATA FILES"
Created in the runtime data directory:
.TP 16
.I .hosts3d/
Linux/macOS runtime data directory
.TP 16
.I hsd-data/
Windows runtime data directory
.TP 16
.I controls.txt
Generated controls/help text
.TP 16
.I settings.ini
Settings (plain text)
.TP 16
.I 0network.hnl
Network Layout On-Exit (newly written layouts use versioned HN2 format)
.TP 16
.I 1network.hnl
Network Layout 1
.TP 16
.I 2network.hnl
Network Layout 2
.TP 16
.I 3network.hnl
Network Layout 3
.TP 16
.I 4network.hnl
Network Layout 4
.TP 16
.I netpos.txt
Network positioning rules
.TP 16
.I traffic*.hpt
Packet Capture & Replay files
.TP 16
.I tmp-hinfo-hsd
Temporary Information
.TP 16
.I tmp-netpos-hsd
Temporary Net Positions
.TP 16
.I tmp-flist-hsd
Temporary Working Directory File List
.TP 16
.I local-hsen.state / local-hsen-windows.state
Managed local \fBhsen\fR process state
.SH "NET POSITIONS"
If a host does not match any explicit net position entry, it is placed
in the Grey Zone.  Rules are evaluated from top to bottom and the
first full match wins.
.P
Supported rule formats include:
.br
"pos net x-position y-position z-position colour [hold]"
.br
"host ip=1.2.3.4 [mac=00:11:22:33:44:55] [fqdn=host.example] x=0 y=0 z=0 color=green [hold]"
.P
Exact IP rules such as \fBpos .../32\fR and \fBhost ip=...\fR can also
materialize known hosts at startup.
.P
.I Positions:
.TP 12
Grey/Red
positive x-position
.TP 12
Blue/Green
negative x-position
.TP 12
Up
positive y-position
.TP 12
Down
negative y-position
.TP 12
Grey/Blue
positive z-position
.TP 12
Red/Green
negative z-position
.P
.I Colours:
.P
none (where multiple colours are used), default (grey), orange,
yellow, fluro, green, mint, aqua, blue, purple, violet.  Adding
\fBhold\fR keeps a host exactly on the configured position instead of
offsetting it to the nearest free spot.
.SH "CONFIGURE LOCAL SENSORS (hsen)"
The \fBConfigure Local Sensors (hsen)\fR dialog can discover interfaces
and start/stop managed local sensors directly from the Hosts3D GUI.
If elevated privileges are required, configure an appropriate
\fBhsen_start_command\fR (for example "sudo -n hsen").  Managed local
\fBhsen\fR processes are tracked and stopped individually; this workflow
does not rely on a blanket "killall hsen".
.SH NOTES
Firewall configuration: hsen talks to Hosts3D via UDP port 10111.  If
hsen is running and Hosts3D is not, ICMP Port Unreachable (UDP port
10111) may be generated.  Hosts3D logs to syslog, check when
troubleshooting.  By default hosts are created from packet source IP
address; enable \fBCreate Hosts for Destination Targets\fR to also add
destination-side targets as hosts.  Anomalies are a new host or host
service.  Using the menu options to move/arrange a few thousand hosts
may take a few minutes.  Deleting hosts, using the menu options to
move/arrange hosts, or clearing/restoring a net layout may affect
packet capture/replay.  Clicking a multiple host object cycles through
selecting the hosts within it.  \fBsettings.ini\fR is plain text and
portable across 32-bit and 64-bit builds.  Older raw layout or packet
files remain more sensitive to binary compatibility than the current
HN2/text-based runtime data.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
hsen(1)
.SH AUTHOR
Original upstream written by Del Castle.
.br
This repository is an independent community-maintained continuation.
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs in this continuation repository:
.br
https://github.com/kaestnja/hosts3d/issues
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 2006-2011  Del Castle
.br
This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.
.br
This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.
