.TH HSEN 1 "13 Apr 26"
.SH NAME
hsen \- hosts3d sensor
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B hsen \fR[\fB\-l\fR] \fIid interface/file \fR[\fIdestination\fR] [\fB\-p\fR] [\fB\-d\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B hsen
is a packet capture agent which reads and sends packet header
information to Hosts3D, locally or remotely.  It can read from a live
capture interface or from a pcap file and can also forward DNS
name-to-IP hints derived from standard UDP/53 responses.  Multiple
sensors can send information to one or more Hosts3D systems.
.TP 13
.I id
Identify packets from a specific hsen when multiple exist (1-255).
.TP 13
.I interface
Listen on interface (eth0, eth1, ppp0, wlan0, etc.); or
.TP 13
.I file
Read packets from pcap file.  Standard input is used if file is "\-".
.TP 13
.I destination
Hosts3D IP or broadcast address (default localhost / 127.0.0.1).
.TP
.B \-l
Display capture interfaces.
.TP
.B \-p
Enable promiscuous mode (default disable).
.TP
.B \-d
Run as daemon (default disable).
.SH NOTES
Firewall configuration: hsen talks to Hosts3D via UDP port 10111.  If
hsen is running and Hosts3D is not, ICMP Port Unreachable (UDP port
10111) may be generated.  To capture packets from some interfaces, or
in promiscuous mode, you may have to start hsen as root (sudo).  hsen
logs to syslog, check when troubleshooting.  Support is IPv4 only.
IP headers with options are ignored.  Packets with optionless GRE or
VLAN 802.1Q encapsulation are supported.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
hosts3d(1)
.SH AUTHOR
Original upstream written by Del Castle.
.br
This repository is an independent community-maintained continuation.
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs in this continuation repository:
.br
https://github.com/kaestnja/hosts3d/issues
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 2006-2011  Del Castle
.br
This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.
.br
This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.
